come a long way
town in Illinois Dixon and the
protective warmth of your mother Nell
her earliest memory of your mother's
influence on you and what she taught you
to do that really shaped your life
well she Corps of course was a major
part I had a brother too a couple of
years older than I am for in our family
the two of us and mother and father and
she was probably the kindest human being
I've ever known now looking back I know
that we live in poverty are pretty close
to it all the time but we didn't know
that at the time because the government
didn't come around and tell us we were
poor and she was always finding someone
worse off that we would help and I
remember that about her this kind honest
Noland yet at the same time she could be
firm like the time in an even smaller
town where I was born
Tampico Illinois eight hundred people
and we lived across a little park from
the railroad station and in those days
the biggest treat wasn't the ice-cream
wagon coming around it was the ice wagon
and kids would get chips of ice from
them
Iceman was chipping the pieces out to
put in the ice boxes along the way and
the ice wagon had pulled up over there
and my brother and I saw it and he being
the older took the lead and we started
across the little park but a train
pulled in between us and the ice wagon
and my mother came out on the porch just
in time to see us get down and crawl
under the train to get to the other side
and we were barely through and at the
ice wagon when the train pulled out she
met us in the middle of that little park
and we felt a very firm hand both of us
applied along about midway in our bags
did she teach you other things as well
like how to read and how to get on in
life about the values of life oh she yes
she was always talking about things like
that but making great sense with them
but they're worth regard of the reading
I don't know that she was aware that she
was teaching
but when we were very young and at that
point we lived in Galesburg in a rented
house there
my father was traveling around looking
for better jobs and she would read to my
brother and me when we went to bed she'd
get between us on the bed and read the
bedtime story but she always did it and
holding the book and running her finger
under the line she was reading and the
two of us were there and we could watch
and we could at the same time hear of
course now I don't know whether she was
doing that deliberately and I have no
recollection of ever learning to read
but I was one night when I was five
years old I was lying on the living room
floor with the newspaper and my father
came in and he said what are you doing
and I said well reading the paper and he
thought I was being smart aleck and he
said well go ahead read me something and
I did and the next thing I knew he was
out on the front porch yelling for the
neighbors and he brought the neighbors
in and made me read for them because
there was no kindergarten I had never
been anyplace but it home at that time
you're away from starting regular school
but yes I was reading the paper
your mother had very strong religious
values as well yes she believed in the
power of prayer for example you believe
in the power of prayer yes can you
recall incidents in your life when you
have prayed and God has answered your
prayer almost in a specific way yes I
think I can and I believe very much in
what Abraham Lincoln said when he had
this job he said he couldn't perform the
functions the duties of this job for
fifteen minutes if he didn't know that
he could call upon one who was wiser and
stronger than all others but in that
connection I think my mother a lesson
that was hammered over and over again
and as I grew up I really began to
realize and that is when there was a
great disappointment something went
wrong she would say to us look just
everything happens for a reason and for
the best now she said you may feel bad
about this right now but down the roads
something will happen good and you will
in appreciating that look back and say
if this if that hadn't happened that
supposed bad thing this good thing would
not have happened and I had a classic
example in my growing up I'd graduated
from college in 1932 I was hitchhiking
around I'd set my mind on a career in
the entertainment world so I thought it
starting if I could ever get in and be a
sports announcer would be radio was
pretty new in those days and finally I
was disappointed I had had advice to
just try to get a job in a station never
mind what you wanted to do and then take
your chances on moving on from there but
I couldn't and a very wise woman in a
major station in Chicago told me that I
was going out of the wrong way
I shouldn't be trying for those big
stations where they couldn't afford to
hire inexperienced go out there into the
smaller stations well I hitchhiked home
and arrived and was told that a
Montgomery Ward's store had opened in
Dixon and they had a sporting goods
department and they were looking for
someone that was kind of well-known in
the town for his high school athletics
there and so forth to head up that
department while I went down and applied
and I didn't get the job
felt a couple of years after me in high
school been quite a basketball sensation
he got the job I was pretty disappointed
my father loaned me the car I'd told him
all the things that I've been doing a
family car and I drove 75 miles in my
disappointment down to the tri-cities
Rock Island and Moline and Davenport
Iowa and there in a station in Davenport
Iowa I met a program director who he
still couldn't use me and but where was
I because they had just hired announcer
a few days before and I didn't tell him
I didn't listen to his station but on
the way out
talking all to myself really I said how
do you ever get to be a sports announcer
if he can't get a job in a radio station
and went on down the hall and pretty
soon I heard a clumping he was very
badly crippled with arthritis
to Keynes and he was yelling out your
big so-and-so wait
and he caught up with me the elevator
wasn't there yet and he said what was
that you said about sports and I said
well that's what I'd like to be what he
said you know anything about football I
said I played it for eight years he said
could you tell me about a football game
and if I was at home listening the radio
make me see it and I said I think so he
took me in a studio stood me in front of
a microphone and he said now when the
red light goes on I'll be in another
room listening you start broadcasting an
imaginary football game well I stood
there waiting for the light and I knew I
had to have names and I remembered the
year of that previous fall my senior
year playing in a game murica when we
went 65 yards on the last play for the
winning touchdown and it was the last
play of the game and I knew all our
players names and I knew enough of the
opponent's names that I figured I could
so I started in the fourth quarter and I
had the long blue shadow settling over
the field and the real wind coming in
through the end of the stadium we didn't
have a stadium we had creatures and then
I ran a few plays and finally I came up
to the big play and I had this and did
the big play and made the touchdown with
only 20 s to play with only 20 seconds
to go and so forth and then I grabbed
the microphone and says that's all he
came in and said be her Saturday I'll
give you $5.00 and carfare you are
broadcasting the iowa minnesota game for
us do you think that if Montgomery
Ward's had hired you for the sports
department I might still be there
working in Montgomery Ward's and not
President of the United States well all
the things in between that resulted and
this wouldn't have happened you and I
come from similar roots I grew up in a
small towns of the Midwest as well and
life has changed for both of us
obviously on many of the grand occasions
that I've been privileged to be a part
of I have often thought back to my roots
to particular friends or incidents in my
life and I've wondered what they Roy
does that happen to you when you're at a
state dinner or the Kremlin or when
you're presiding at some ceremony for
example in Norman
does Dixon flash through your mind in
those days oh there are things I think
it takes reminders and so far removed in
that way of life and this one but there
are reminders every once in a while that
just like this one that at length I gave
you that that you will think back and
say hey this maybe had a beginning there
you went from Dixon to Eureka College
and you studied economics among other
things you reminded your advisers of
that from time to time what have you
remembered from your Eureka economics
courses that have helped you in dealing
with the national economy well I was i
majored in economics and sociology they
were combined so it was a single major
but then you were really studying at a
time when life was in the raw this was
the depths of the depression we had a
professor a wonderful hello daddy gray
and he used to give us outside reading
books by economists to read then we'd
come in with a book report and so forth
then we discuss it and I can remember
him he had a sense of humor also there
we were in the depths of the depression
a book by a noted economist and when
we'd finished reporting and everything
just as the class was concluding he'd
say it's interesting to note that the
author of this book five weeks before
the crash said he saw no reason why
stock should not continue to rise
indefinitely well that sexual illustrate
but it makes you suspicious of
economists for evermore
well no but the the the things I say at
that time you were really studying in a
classic example of economics and what
was going to happen this was prior to
the election of of FDR and all of the
recessions we've had since no one who
didn't go through the through the
depression can ever visualize what it
was like 26 percent unemployment
nationwide the government going on radio
with announcements don't leave home
looking for a job there are
well there were no government programs
at that time to take care of of the
people that suddenly were just destitute
my father from managing a shoe store
with a kind of work a partnership in the
ownership was out the shoe store was
gone and this was happening in little
towns like Dickson as well as in the
great cities the National Guard in
Illinois was mobilized and sent to
parade in Chicago simply because there
were so many people living in doorways
on the streets by that time in the
streets just off Michigan Boulevard that
there was real concern about rioting and
and so forth and they just did that as a
show of strength there are still people
in this country now who are homeless and
we're still struggling economically and
so on and for some of them it's a kind
of continuation of the depression is
there a parallel between what's going on
for some families in this country now
and what happened then well there may be
some because there are a few spots in
the country where due to a change in
industry and so forth they principal
industries in those communities are gone
and it's a case of either move or bring
a new industry into the community and so
forth so there are a few trouble spots
but basically as you know 19 million new
jobs have been created and the largest
percentage of those has gone to the
people most in need and they are better
jobs than ever before and over 90% of
them are full-time not part-time jobs so
it isn't a situation comparable to that
and I think that you have to recognize
that some of the people on the street
have chosen that because right here in
Washington shelters both private and
public that have been opened for those
people have space in them and people
that can go there and won't prefer to be
out there on the grates and so forth and
whatever their reason is just remember
that recently in New York a young lady
took a case to court
to force them under her constitutional
right to let her go back and live in
that cardboard box out on the street
present let me ask you about your
Hollywood career
you went from a good job in Des Moines
Iowa as a radio broadcaster in the
height of the depression to Hollywood
where you were making what $200 a week I
think is a contract player at Warner
Brothers yes did you begin to think
about that time gee maybe there's a
lucky star that's kind of hovering over
Ronald Reagan that luck is gonna be a
part of your life in some fashion well
whether I called it luck or whether I
call it an answer to prayers I I
realized that I was very blessed and
that's why I thought that also and for
those blessings that I kind of I ought
to pay my way by doing whatever I could
and return for others we're all
starstruck in this society a little bit
when you arrived and how I would who
were the big stars that you remember
seeing that really made an impression on
you that oh well this was in the
wonderful era of Hollywood that exists
no more the era when the seven major
studios all had their lists of contract
players and stars their directors were
under contract the producers and writers
it was like a family in the studio and
at Warner Brothers there was Jimmy
Cagney and Pat O'Brien and Betty Davis
and Wayne Morris had just become a young
new star they're on for kid Galahad that
he'd made but then Dick Powell and Jack
Carson and when you can go along with
the with the trying to think of them all
at the same time but you'd eat there in
the commissary at lunch and they were
all around you and be at their same
table with you and it was a wonderful
time but also you were made to realize
you you were under contract now they
took me in and sat me down and it was as
if I couldn't hear because they were all
talking about me in front of me and they
were trying to decide on a name for me
I'd always used my kid nicknamed Dutch
one as a sports announcer Dutch Reagan
and they were talking and talking and
finally I was getting a little
uncomfortable
and finally I said to them because that
was a pretty big radio station by then I
said look you know
my name's rather well-known in a large
section of the country and do you think
we just toss it off and they said Dutch
Reagan and I said well my real name is
Ronald Reagan I'd never used the Ronald
I like Dutch better and they said Ronald
Ronald Reagan
hey that's not bad I got to keep my own
name Ronald Reagan who are the actresses
that you like playing with and those is
starring within films that you remember
oh my goodness the lane sisters had just
come on big in pictures Priscilla Lane I
was in a picture with Betty Davis and it
was a wonderful experience such a great
actress and it was Jane Bryant oh good
lord I'm forgetting some of the names of
what Ann Gerard and Sheridan oh yes he
picked it with Ann Sheridan and she was
she was a great gal just wonderful you
watch films I know now you know who the
contemporary film is Sarah Connor it's
very possible that they're gonna make
the story of Ronald Reagan now if you
could cast that story of Ronald Reagan
who would you like to play the part of
you I'd rather they didn't make this
story if I can't play it I don't know
that I want to recommend anyone else do
you like current film stars do you have
some favorites among the current - croco
stars the I'll tell you the lack of
continued publicity as we had when the
fan magazines existed and everything and
each studio had a publicity apartment
with men that were assigned to a group
of performers there to see that their
names were constantly before the public
that doesn't exist anymore and I find a
great difficulty in remembering the
names I'll see a face on the screen say
oh yeah her members saw them in another
picture but the names just don't don't
linger you recently talked in your
farewell address to the nation about
films that had strong moral values and
celebrated American patriotism what are
some of those films that you remember
that did that oh my well if you remember
constantly there were there were movies
that were made can't remember titles but
movies that were made say about West
Point or Annapolis and always at that
kind that the plot took place in the
story with regard to cadets but were
there in the in those schools and then
there or of course the service pictures
that and when the war came war pictures
that were built and based on patriotism
and so forth and and were pretty factual
in their portrayal of those of those
times yes I think there was a great
thought in in Hollywood too to make
pictures that tied in to the things that
people understood and knew mr. president
you also said in that farewell speech
that you directed American children to
sit down with their parents and talk
about what America stands for
and what there is to celebrate in this
country if you could lead that kind of a
discussion at a dinner table who would
be the people in your lifetime that you
would put forward as the Patriots the
kind of model Americans who would serve
to inspire our coming generations oh I
think there are any any number you could
start with our people that go abroad and
not in there or go out into space in the
shuttle but you could come back to the
heroes of our time and but I think also
it's more general than that that's that
I remember as a little kid you knew that
when the flag went by you were to stand
up put your hand in your heart you knew
that you were to stand and sing the
national anthem and you learned to
recite the Pledge of Allegiance and you
also history was required and therefore
you knew the beginnings of this country
and you knew the names of the the great
Patriots and who a George Washington was
but but all the others and I don't think
that's true today so often well when
and I won't name the University don't
want to embarrass anyone but when not
too long ago third-year students juniors
in one of our large universities
couldn't tell anyone which side in World
War two Hitler was on now is there
anything wrong with thinking that
history not with regard to whether it's
going to help you make a living or
anything of that kind but that everyone
should know the background and the
history of their country how it came to
be and thus what our citizens
responsibilities are isn't it a little
shameful that in this country which had
to fight for the independence of We the
People is now smaller and smaller
growing the number of people who bother
to vote how does anyone have the nerve
to complain about any level of
government if they didn't go to the
polls Will Rogers once said that people
in lected to public office are no better
and no worse and the people who send
them there but they're all better than
those who don't vote at all especially
you've had such an extraordinary life
starting as I say from that small town
in Dixon Illinois when you were coming
of age working-class family there you've
risen to these great heights of being
President of the United States you leave
office with the good will of the
American people behind you what's the
difference between being in this kind of
a position a member of the haves I
suppose the best way to describe it in
American life and the earlier days of
your life when you remember the
have-nots well again as I say I
recognize that for whatever reason I
have been blessed and never a day goes
by that I don't say a thanks for that
blessing and also I ask that
I be given the wisdom to do something to
show my my thanks for that and blessing
and I don't it just pause here for a
minute because I'm gonna there a couple
of things we haven't been able to get to
that I would like to get back to and the
anecdotal stuff know that yeah okay if
we could just if we can agree on that
we'll be alright okay I want
mr. president you had a very strong
relationship with someone named Margaret
cleaver yes you're all but engaged to
her
was engaged I honed my fraternity pin on
her you talked about your future
together probably well yes she was the
daughter of the minister of our church
and I know that she was going to Eureka
College and it wasn't really that I made
the decision then to go there I had
already made that when I was much
younger my biggest hero happened to be
the son of the then minister of the
church and he was a great high school
football star and as a kid I saw him and
thought he was great and he went to your
ikan played football there later for a
time why I think was the chaplain at
Yale University but yes we went together
in high school
Eureka College before we got out of
college why that was I don't know
whether it still exists today but yes
engagement you buy rings you put your
fraternity pin on her how did you think
that your life together would take shape
I mean what did you what were your hopes
then when you were going with Mark Lee
well I knew that from my own background
and so forth I knew that I had to
achieve a certain level of income before
could contemplate marriage but I think
that's the thing that that our romance
didn't survive she became a
schoolteacher and I was way over in Iowa
there as a sports announcer and a long
separation there wasn't chance or
possibility of visiting each other
frequently and then one day I received a
notice that she was engaged in marrying
someone else she broke it off you didn't
break it off no and a former teacher in
high school of mine won that kind of
teacher that every student has that you
remembered through your life he wrote me
a letter
he had also seen what had happened and
he wrote me a letter telling me how I
was to react and that I was to do any
foolish things like going off the deep
end or anything and I remembered him but
again it must have been one of those
things that the disappointment that now
you look back on and say well if that
had happened what what I have now might
not have happened there's a celebrated
story in your years at your Eureka
College about one of your college
football teammates William Burkhart was
a black member of the team and he
couldn't get into a hotel where the
whole team was supposed to stay so you
took him to your home in Dixon Illinois
where he was immediately put up with
another black teammate people who look
at that story say well Ronald Reagan
seemed to be more sensitive about those
kinds of things then then he has been as
the president of the United States and
maybe it's because he bumped up against
them in a firsthand way back in Eureka
that whole thing has been the hardest
burden I think of all that I have born
here is that idea that I am NOT as
sensitive and that somehow I am
discriminating and so forth and it is
not true that household I was raised in
my mother and father the thing my
brother and I grew up knowing was that
there was no greater sin than prejudice
or discrimination and this was back in
the days when there was discrimination
generally and in Eureka College yes what
happened was that we had to stay
overnight in our hometown on a way the
bus load of players on a way to a
Saturday game and I took the coach in
introducing to the manager of the hotel
and he said that he would take everybody
but those two when our coach Mac he said
well we'll sleep in the bus and he
turned her because the man had said also
that no other hotel would either there
weren't many hotels in that little town
and we started out and I told him Mac I
said we can't do that I said if they'll
know what the reason is and be
embarrassed well he said what can we do
when he had told me that I couldn't stay
at home even though I had a home there
and I said well why don't we just say
there isn't enough room for everybody
and you put me in the two fellas in a
cab and we'll go home and even then he
feeling is upset as he he did he said
are you sure you you won't do that
and I said yes I knew my home no chance
to call her anything home rang the
doorbell and Nellie came to the door my
brother and I decided to call our
parents by their first name after we got
to a certain age came to the door and I
said no there isn't enough room in the
hotel for all of us can we put up here
well she never course you can put up
here and then we came and that that
wasn't unusual for the way I was raised
or brought up at all and I still feel
the same way as governor of California I
appointed more blacks to executive and
art and policymaking positions than all
the previous governors California put
together and I asked you about your
family because it was such an important
part of your early childhood you didn't
have a lot of money in that family your
father is you've written in your own
book drank too much he wasn't able to
hold a job in a lot of different places
and yet you always stayed together as a
family even though there are big
differences between you and your brother
moon for example about how you see life
and how you conduct yourselves and here
you are the president United States your
financial future is secure you've got a
very good marriage but within your own
family now there are these strains
michael has written a book that is in
critical of the way the family's been
conducted patty and mrs. Reagan are not
talking is that just an affliction of
modern life is that how we've changed in
this country what it might be patty now
we feel and I we haven't given up but
patty came up at that age when all the
writing was going on in the campuses and
if I went near one of them they'd burn
me in effigy
but no the rest of the family is united
and the book about that Mike if you'd
read it
it's a very unusual book Mike was
adopted and this was a book about this
and so the first part of the book is his
attitude which he's now confessing to
but the last part of the book it's
almost as if it's by a different human
being Nancy was the one who told him how
to find his real mother when he wanted
to and she was dead but he found he has
a brother and so the last part of it and
we're as close as can possibly be and he
is I would recommend that book to anyone
with adopted children he was writing of
the resentment that was within him about
his situation and it's a it's a
fascinating book mr. president you're
about to go off into retirement Richard
Nixon studies international affairs a
lot these days
Gerald Ford works on this commission for
the new presidency and plays Auto golf
and does a lot of speaking Jimmy Carter
pursues his interest at the Carter
Library and in terms of the Middle East
and the problems of the inner cities
going up back out on the mashed-potato
circuit and trying to arouse the public
to demand some changes which it is their
right to demand the line-item veto for a
president the balanced budget amendment
but most of the states have but the
federal government doesn't have Thomas
Jefferson called attention to that and
there are things that well for example
the 22nd amendment that was passed by
our own party here is revenge for
Roosevelt that says that two terms as
the limit for a president this is the
only office that's elected by all the
people I think that is an infringement
on the Democratic rights of the people
and now that I'm out of office so that
they can't accuse me of wanting to do it
for myself I'm going to see if I can't
mobilize the people to demand the repeal
of that amendment it is an invasion of
their democratic Veit wrote or write
to vote for whoever they want to vote
for and for however long so we'll see a
lot of Ronald Reagan speaking around the
country yeah every if you look mr.
president you look back on this
extraordinary life that you've had
covering most of the 20th century in
America going from Dixon Illinois to the
heights of power president of the United
States what's the one thing that really
sticks out in your mind about made the
difference for you made it possible well
I think maybe the teaching that I had
and the faith that I had in prayer and I
did it incidentally we're leaving out a
lot of hometowns you know and when you
mentioned my father's drinking let me
point out he was an alcoholic yes our
family stayed together because my mother
took the two of us aside my brother
myself and said there will you'll see
things and sometimes your father but you
must not turn against him he has a
sickness and as a sickness that we must
try to help him with it wasn't a case of
just you know a lush coming home I've
seen him go two or three years without a
drink but he was in the classics had an
alcoholic and once that first drop went
down that's the thing with an alcoholic
they're no different than anyone else
until they take that first drink and
then it would be a bender all the way to
where he would be flat on his back and
you called the doctor did that make you
conscious of your own drinking habits
yes yes I think so I've never felt any
thing of that kind because it is an
illness and I can remember very much the
that there's you know doctor Medicine
can't explain it yet some want to look
for a second psychopathic or psychotic
psychologic reason others look for some
physical there has been one about
shortage of sugar I know that when in
the Hall the periods of soberness my
father was the biggest dessert eater I
ever saw and in fact he wasn't above and
he did a good naturedly he'd say hey
what's that out the window and about
look out the window or my brother would
he take a spoonful of our dessert but
was that the key the family strength
that you had when you look back over the
last 50 years of your life yes though
there was never a hint in our family
that there could ever be a dissolution
of the family as a matter of fact and we
were even split religiously my father
was a Catholic and my mother was a
Protestant but if we were to get any
religion that was to come from her
because for a period there I think he
gave up going to church for Lent but
toward the end of his life he went back
he was in the church and no it was and
hometowns started with Tampico then
Chicago then Galesburg then Monmouth
Illinois then back to Tampico and then
to Dixon and it was about eight or nine
that I went to years old that I went to
Dixon Thank You mr. president
[Music]